the dangers of shallow water blackout
there are multiple causes of shallow
water blackout train freedivers become
good at ignoring their desire to breathe
can become very focused on a task or can
be reluctant to ruin the day's diving by
releasing their weight belt also having
survived many previous freedoms some
simply become overconfident there are
many factors and combinations of factors
which are regularly seen that cause a
diver who did not intend this freedom to
be their last - sadly perish we know
that human physiology changes over time
what the diver has grown accustomed to
as normal may simply be beyond their
ability to survive in certain extreme or
unusual instances in some cases blackout
occurs without warning in other cases
the severely hypoxic diver is incapable
of manipulating their weight belt
quick-release mechanism as the diver
approaches the end of their dive we
believe that there is a profound change
in their psychology the diver simply
cannot rely on their internal clock or
whatever mechanism tells them it is time
to ascend this is why well-trained
physically fit and often very
experienced divers sometimes die with
their weight belt still in place free
divers black out when the oxygen content
in their brains drops below the level
necessary to support consciousness the
brain is more sensitive to the lack of
oxygen than other tissues furthermore
the way that blood retains oxygen
favours a steady metering out of oxygen
to the tissues during the first part of
the dive as a long Frida progresses
oxygen levels drop in the lungs these
levels drop even more sharply in the
tissues rapidly decreasing levels of
oxygen available to the brain sneak up
on victims very rapidly and many
survivors of shallow water blackout
simply do not recall the sensation of
air hunger or an impending blackout
blackouts among free divers can be
divided into three groups depending upon
which part of the diet they occur in one
in static apnea blackout the free diver
dives to the bottom of a pool or body of
water and blacks out without ever
attempting to return to the surface they
may even be resting on the surface of
the water and facedown position
these divers blackout from lack of
oxygen without some of the pressure
compounding problems that are sending
divers experience to in shallow water
blackout the ascending divers blood
oxygen levels are low in the expanding
lungs draw precious oxygen back from the
blood instead of forcing oxygen into the
blood as they do during descent this
form of blackout often happens before
reaching the surface
many of these divers lose control of
their breath-hold ability and observers
have seen air leaking from their mouths
unless the diver is very buoyant near
the surface the effects of air
compression on the lungs in wet suit
combined with the loss of air from the
mouth all increase the divers tendency
to sink back down three the last and
possibly the most insidious form of
black out is surface black out is the
distressed diver ascends the lungs
expand which in turn drops the oxygen
pressure and actually draws oxygen from
the blood in a vacuum effect however as
long as the diver holds their breath
there is some oxygen pressure available
to their blood on the surface the diver
exhales almost instantly what little
oxygen pressure is left in the lungs
disappears and the pressure within the
chest decreases as well exhalation at
the surface places the oxygen depleted
diver in potential jeopardy for two
reasons
firstly the decrease in oxygen pressure
in the lungs and secondly the decrease
and the overall pressure within the
chest in order to avoid shallow water
blackouts you should of course follow
the standard good free diving practices
which include the use of a buddy
proper surface intervals between dives
proper weighting adequate preparation
before each dive rest fitness and simple
common sense